---
title: Theory Exploration notes 2015-06-25
---

# "Cabal Hell" #

Dependency issues, AKA 'cabal hell', have been slowing things down.

Firstly, getting QuickSpec, Hipspecifyer, etc. to compile requires chasing down many out-of-date dependencies from Hackage, which cause conflicts with each other. For example:

 - Hipspecifyer requires haskell-src-exts < 0.16, so we must force version 0.15.0.1 to be used
 - Hipspecifyer depends on Hint, yet Hint depends on haskell-src-exts version 0.16.0.1
 - The latest version of Hint which works for haskell-src-exts 0.15.0.1 is version 1.9.4
 - Version 1.9.4 of Hint doesn't compile with GHC 7.10, so we must use GHC 7.8.4

 - Using GHC to extract features from Haskell modules requires any imports to be available. These have (at least) two forms:
    - *Library* modules, which are defined within the package we're analysing. These are tricky, since we must provide GHC with the right import directories in order to find the files, yet we may end up in a situation where *too many* files are found! For example, if we have a module `Foo` defined in a file `src/Foo.hs`, and a testing module `Tests.Foo` defined in `tests/Tests/Foo.hs`, GHC can get confused and use the latter as the source of the former.
    - *Package* modules come from the dependencies we specify in our Cabal file. These are read from a *package database*, which must be generated using a tool like `ghc-pkg`, `cabal`, etc. Package modules seem to be opaque to AST extraction, since attempting to set one as a GHC "target" gives an error.
 -
